I trust that you keep your eyes on Jesus, even as we've had our theme this year, looking
unto Jesus and what peace He gives, amen?
And so thankful for that.
This morning we'll be in Hebrews 12, verses 4 through 17, and as we look at this passage
of Scripture, of course, last week we looked at the first few verses of Hebrews 12 and
dealing with the thought there of run the race and understanding that we're involved
in this race, and there are many that would seek to just cause us to be distracted, and
the distractions abound, and we dealt with that.
As we move into this next section of Hebrews 12, we see that a subject matter is spoken
of.
It's a subject matter that is rarely discussed, but I believe it's of significant importance,
and that subject matter is that of chastening, or the chastisement of the Lord.
And we find that the Lord has provided details in His Word regarding chastisement so that
we would understand at least two things.
Number one, it is part of His divine plan, and number two, it has a definite purpose.
And chastisement is part of God's plan, and it does have a purpose.
As we look at this particular text of Scripture, right in the beginning we find that these
first century believers had to be reminded of something.
They're told that they had forgotten, and so they need to be reminded of some truth,
and perhaps this morning there are some of us that need to be reminded of some of this
truth as well with regard to the subject matter of chastisement.
We see once again, as has been really the regular occurrence through the book of Hebrews,
that the writer will use Old Testament passages, and then properly apply them many times.
The Messianic prophecies, properly applying them to the person of Jesus Christ, we find
in this particular account, using an Old Testament portion of Scripture and properly applying
it to the people of God.
And I'm so thankful that we have the whole canon of Scripture, that God has given us
His Word, and that it is profitable for us, and what a blessing it is.
Let's dig right in.
In verse number four, the Bible says, you have not yet resisted unto blood, striving
against sin, basically dealing with here as kind of this segue between the previous passage
and what we're dealing with to now this passage, is that these that are being written to, they've
not yet been martyred, they've faced some difficulties for sure, but they've not yet
been martyred.
And we find that he then enters into the subject matter that is before us this morning, verse
number five, and ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children.
My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked
of him.
For whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.
We'll make our way through verse number 17 this morning, but the title of the message
comes from verse number six this morning, whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth.
Whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth.
And for some of us this morning, we might say, well, that doesn't make sense in my mind,
because if he loves me, then he's just going to let me get away with whatever's going on.
And that's where we've misunderstood the love of God, and really the definition of love
in general.
Let me give you a couple of definitions, we'll get right into the passage this morning.
Let me help you understand this word chastening.
It's instruction which aims at increasing virtue.
Instruction which aims at increasing virtue.
It also carries with it the idea of correction and punishment.
We find that then he uses the word, he says, for whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth in
verse number six, and then says this, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.
That word scourge means to punish with severity, to chastise, to afflict for sins or faults.
And here's the great part of the definition, and with the purpose of correction.
And we understand that even as we would look at the analogy that is used in verse number
nine of the physical human relationships that we're aware of this understanding of discipline,
that we would find that when we think about and consider the subject matter of the chastening
of the Lord, that we understand at the very onset that God chastens in love, whom the
Lord loveth, he chasteneth.
And so we understand that he chastens in love.
I also would say this, that his chastisement is measured and appropriate.
What I mean by that is that his chastisement for you might be different than for me, and
at times in your life, his chastisement might have different levels of severity because
it is measured and it is appropriate.
And it's important for us to understand that if you have children, and perhaps if you have
multiple children, you'll understand that discipline varies with your children.
It varies by offense, and it also varies based upon personality.
My brother and I, there's only two of us, and we have very different personalities,
and what my parents would use for discipline for him didn't work so well for me, and what
they used as discipline for me didn't work so well for him.
It's just the way it was.
And the reality is that God, as the omniscient God, as our heavenly Father, when he chastens
us, when he disciplines us, we understand that it's measured and it's appropriate.
And finally, I'd say this by way of introduction, that it is with a distinct purpose.
And I'm so thankful that our God loves us and he has a plan for our lives.
There are times as human beings that we can kind of get sideways, if you will.
There are times as human beings that we get distracted with the affairs of the world,
with the things that are going on, and there are times in which our God lovingly comes
and brings chastisement in our life for a purpose, and we are thankful for that.
I understand that many times, perhaps on a daily basis, you don't go through the process
of praising God and maybe have chastening be on your list of why to praise God.
But I would submit to you this morning, and I would hope that by the end of the message
this morning, that we would come to that place in our lives where we say, I am thankful for
the chastening of God.
I am thankful that God loves me so much that he is interested in my walk with him and he
chastens me to correct me so that I might have that increase of virtue, that I might
have my course corrected.
As we look at the passage of Scripture this morning, I want you to notice first of all
what chastening proves.
Number one, notice what chastening proves.
I find first of all that chastening proves that God loves me.
It proves that God loves me.
Now I've already said, kind of by way of introduction, that generally speaking as a society, we have
lost the true meaning and expression of love.
There are some today that have this idea, and on Wednesday evening we spoke about some
of the moral attributes of God, and one of them being love.
And I spent a few minutes on Wednesday evening dealing with the subject matter of the love
of God and how well that blends in with even the message for this morning.
The reality is that we live in a society in which many people have this idea that if you
love someone, that means you coddle them, you tell them what they want to hear, you
just tell them everything's going to be okay, and that's your expression of love.
But really, that's not biblical love.
And we understand that as we think about the love of God, that His love is a pure love,
it is a perfect love, because our God is perfect.
In God loving us, He therefore chastens us.
Notice, as we consider the passage of Scripture and we think about the love, it says here
in verse number five, when He speaks about the fact that they have forgotten the exhortation
which speaketh unto you, notice, as unto children.
He's going to reference a portion of Scripture from Proverbs 3, verses 11 and 12, and He
says this,
My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked
of Him.
For whom the Lord loveth, He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.
And we've used as our title this morning that portion of verse number six, whom the Lord
loveth, He chasteneth, but we must wrap our minds around the truth this morning, that
when we consider the subject matter of chastening, that we find, first of all, we notice in the
Scriptures that it proves some things, and number one, it proves that God loves us.
So often we speak about the love of God, and we should.
We sing about the love of God, and we should.
And we quote verses of Scripture that speak about how God has declared His love for us,
how He has demonstrated His love for us, and I'm so thankful for Calvary, I'm so thankful
that God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
I'm thankful for what Paul says in Romans 5, that God commendeth His love toward us,
and that while we're yet sinners, that Christ died for us, but I want you to understand
this morning that another demonstration of God's love is when He corrects us, when He
chastens us.
He's saying, I love you, and He chastens us.
We find this morning, notice if you hold your place here and look over to the book of Revelation,
if you will, Revelation chapter number 3, and look at verse number 19 with me, and we
find that here in, of course, Revelation 2 and 3, the letters being sent, the messages
being sent to the seven churches in Asia Minor, and we find that this last of the letters
is being sent to the church.
It's very interesting, often we say the church of Laodicea, but you'll notice that the Scripture
simply says, not the church of Laodicea, but the church of Laodicea.
the Laodiceans. And I think it's interesting that distinction that God
gives us, especially as we begin to find that which would characterize these
believers, that they looked and they said, man, we are full of everything that we
need, we have no need of anything, and God says that's what you say, but I'm gonna
tell you your real condition. He says that you're wretched, you're miserable,
you're poor, you're blind, and you're naked. Now that's quite a difference in
understanding, is it not? You think about the the perspective, the perception of
the church of the Laodiceans. They thought that they were doing pretty well.
They said, I'm rich, increased with goods, and have need of nothing. And God says,
actually, here's your condition. But I want you to consider what God says to
these believers in Laodicea, the church of the Laodiceans. He says to these, he
says, I counsel thee in verse 18, but I want you to focus on the truth that
we're looking at here in verse 19. It says this, as many as I love, I rebuke
and chasten. Be zealous, therefore, and repent. As many as I love, I rebuke and
chasten. You know that the love of God was on display in the Old Testament each
time he sent a prophet of God to the nation of Israel to call them back to
himself? Not only was it God's love that was being displayed, we find that God's
long-suffering, and his grace, and his mercy, and his care for his people. And
yes, there were messages of judgment, and there were periods of judgment, and we
find that God, in his love, he didn't just let him go. No, he kept calling and kept
sending a prophet. And for us today, as New Testament believers, we find that
there are times in which God will chasten us. He will correct us. He will
rebuke us. And it proves to us that he loves us. Not only does it prove that he
loves us, but it proves to us back in Hebrews chapter number 12, it proves to
us that we belong to him. We belong to him. We're his child. We're his son. I'm
mindful, as you're there in Hebrews chapter number 12, of what the Gospel of
John says in John 1 in verse number 12, but as many as received him, to then gave
he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. I am
thankful this morning to be a son of God. I'm thankful to be a child of God. What a
great privilege to be adopted into the family of God, to know that God is my
father. What a blessing to know that because of the work of the Lord Jesus
Christ on the cross of Calvary, that we have been reconciled, we've been redeemed,
and we have been adopted into the family of God. And we find that as we
consider the subject matter of chastening, not only does it prove that
God loves me, but proves that I belong to him. Notice with me the use of the word
son and sons. In verse number 5, it says that he speaketh unto you as unto
children, and then notice he says, my son. This message that is being given, remember
as we started and we looked at some portions of the book of Hebrews where
there were various sections that were not necessarily written to the believers,
I was speaking about another group of people, and we find especially as we
enter into the 12th chapter, he says, let us, right, and he's beginning again to
focus upon the believers here that he's writing to. He says, my son despise not
thou the chastening of the Lord. Notice in verse number 6, whom the Lord loveth, he
chasteneth and scourgeth. Look what it says, every son whom he receiveth. And
then he says this in verse number 7, if ye endure chastening, God dealeth with
you as with sons. For what son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? If you're here this
morning and you say, I have no idea what you're talking about chastening. I've
never experienced chastening. I've never experienced the correction of God, the
discipline of God. I would submit to you this morning that the Bible says, what
son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? You're not perfect and neither am I. And
there are times in each of our lives that we need the correction of God and
we experience the correction of God. We experience his chastening. Now I hope in
your life, I hope and pray in my life, that I don't have to get to a place
where it's too severe. You understand what I'm saying? I want to be sensitive
to the correction of God. I would say to you that physically speaking as a child,
I was not always sensitive to the discipline of mom and dad. I didn't,
listen, I knew my dad's look. Some of you kids, you know, my kids, they know dad's
look. They know if I kind of snap my fingers, they know I know what they're
doing. I know what's going on. And some of you kids, you know mom and dad, but there
were times in which, guess what I did when I saw that look from my dad or I
heard that snap of his finger, I kind of just blew right through the red light,
you know what I mean? Just kind of avoided the whole warning sign that was
given. And then all of a sudden, the the discipline was not just a, hey you need
to stop. It elevated. You understand what I'm saying, right? I mean, you
experience this, I hope. There are times in which we just blow through the
warning signs and we just say, you know what, I'm enjoying what I'm doing.
Whatever the messed up, I said we get sideways sometimes. And the reality is
that I want to be sensitive to the Holy Spirit of God. I don't want to quench or
grieve the Spirit. Doesn't mean that I don't do it. I'm saying I want to be
sensitive to. I want to hear when he's bringing that. Why? Because I don't want
to deal with the severity. There were times in which, as a child, I dealt with
severe, I would call it capital punishment, you know. And mom would say,
wait until dad gets home. Now they're not here today. They're just watching online.
They're up in New Jersey, so I have a little bit more liberty this morning.
But she would say something like this, just wait until dad gets home. And
then negotiation came out, right? I was trying to negotiate with her as to why
it was not a good idea to tell my dad what happened and how I was willing to
do whatever I needed to do in order to avoid the wrath of dad. And sure enough,
he'd come home from a long day's work and one of the things that would be said
is what happened that day, right? And then all of a sudden you do, and guess what,
every time I was like, man, I wish, I wish that when mom said or did that I just
took heed. Because then it wouldn't have been so bad. But the reality is that why
did my dad, why, we look at the truth in verse number nine, furthermore we have
had fathers of our flesh which corrected us and we gave them reverence. Shall we
not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits and live? Why did my
dad never came home from work and corrected the neighbor's kid? Never. Why?
Wasn't his son. Wasn't his daughter. Never corrected him. Never disciplined him. The
Bible tells us with the subject matter of chastening, we consider what
does chastening prove when we notice what the scriptures say. It proves not
only that God loves me, but proves that I belong to him. I'm his child. He says this,
we're of all our partakers in verse number eight. At the end of verse number
seven, for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? As much as we try to
think that our children are well-behaved, we understand there are times in which
your children need correction. Your children need discipline. And as God's
children, there are times in which we need the chastening hand of God. And it
proves to us that we're his children. We notice here, and as we continue, we looked
at the end of verse number seven, look at verse number eight, but if ye be without
chastisement, and then you see the parenthesis there, we're of all our
partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons. Illegitimate. There are some that
would say that they're a child of God and they live like the devil and they
never experience any kind of discipline. And by not, listen, that chastening is a
birthmark of a believer. God loves you. He's your father, and therefore He
chastens you. There are times in which, no doubt, maybe you've desired to discipline
your neighbor's child, but you hopefully didn't do it. God chastens me because I
belong to Him. And God will chasten you if you belong to Him. We find that as we
think about this truth, that if we are, if we've been saved, if we're a child of
God, that as His children we will experience chastisement in our lives, but
we remember what He says in verse number five. He says, despise not thou the
chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of Him. You think about
the subject matter that is before us, and I know that it's not a super popular
subject matter, I understand that, but it certainly is biblical, and it's
appropriate, and it's helpful, and we find this morning that when God tells us to
despise not, nor faint in verse number five, in verse number seven He says, endure
chastening, if ye endure chastening. We find that as He gives us this truth, that
He's helping us because we understand, listen, it proves something. It's not just
so that we can be tormented and have no purpose in it. No, it proves that I belong
to Him. It proves that He loves me. We understand this morning as we study the
subject matter of chastisement, we notice first of all what it proves, not
only what it proves, but notice with me as we continue through the text, notice
what it produces, notice what chastening produces.
I said to you this in the beginning of the message,
that we would understand that the Word of God
gives us instruction with regard to chastisement
so that we would understand that it is part of God's divine plan,
and also that it has a definite purpose.
It produces some things in our lives.
Notice in v. 9, I've read it already.
He's using the physical analogy or illustration
of that human relationship that we have,
and it says, furthermore,
we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us.
And we gave them reverence.
Now notice where he says,
shall we not much rather be in subjection
unto the Father of spirits and live?
For they, he's referring to that human relationship
that we're aware of between fathers and children.
He says, for they verily for a few days
chastened us after their own pleasure,
but then look at this phrase,
but He, speaking about God our Father,
He, for our profit.
It's for our benefit.
It produces something in our lives.
Now, when you discipline your children,
you're hoping that it produces something.
You're hoping that there's a change in behavior, right?
That sometimes when you have little ones
and you're dealing with the same thing day after day,
and you can find yourself coming to this thought of,
is it ever going to sink in?
Is it ever going to work?
And I've said to parents so many times over the years
that one of the main things,
one of the best words of advice that I could give you
as a parent with regard to discipline
is consistency.
Because there are times in which we think
it's not going to work.
And then one day, it like clicks with little Johnny
and you see some change and you're like,
praise the Lord, this is wonderful.
But we think about the chastisement of the Lord,
He says this,
but He, for our profit.
So I find that it proves some things,
but I find that it produces some things.
Listen, chastisement, correcting,
this is for my good.
Now I understand, again, this isn't popular.
This isn't a message that people are gonna,
man, this is wonderful.
I mean, how popular is this?
No, but we understand this morning
that many have missed an important Bible truth
by ignoring the subject matter,
not wanting to discuss it.
Why?
Because it's not popular,
but the reality is that it's for our benefit.
It's for our profit.
It produces some things.
Notice what the Bible says
at the end of verse number 10,
that we might be partakers of His holiness.
And we begin to think about the fact
that our God is holy and how wonderful that is.
It's the first attribute that we dealt with
this past Wednesday evening
in looking and speaking of the subject matter
that His name is holy,
one of His most prevalent character traits
in all of the Scriptures.
And we find that our God is holy
and He calls us as His children to be holy.
He says, be holy, for I am holy.
We find that Peter says this
in 1 Peter 1 in verses 14 through 16,
when we think about the subject matter
of holiness and godly living.
I've said often through the years,
and it's worth repeating this morning,
God cares how you live.
How you live your life matters to God.
Sometimes we think, well, I can just do what I want.
I'm saved.
I'm thankful for the doctrine of eternal security
and what a blessing to know that as His child,
that He is my Savior, my Father forever and ever.
In fact, Peter deals with that
in the very beginning of this epistle
when he talks about the fact
that we have an inheritance, incorruptible,
undefiled, that fadeth not away,
reserved in heaven for you.
We're kept by the power of God.
What a blessing.
And I'm so thankful for the truth of eternal security,
but you know how you live and how I live matters to God?
Your children are your children, amen?
And they will forever be.
No matter how estranged a relationship
could ever become upon this earth,
if your children are your biological children,
they will forever be your children.
Amen?
But do you care how they live?
Sure you do.
And no one wants to say, well, my child,
you know, they're in the big house and they're...
Who wants to talk that way?
Right, we don't want that to be the case.
And so God cares about how we live as His children.
We're His representatives.
Notice what Peter says in 1 Peter 1.
Look at verse 13.
Wherefore, gird up the loins of your mind,
be sober and hope to the end
for the grace that is to be brought unto you
at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
As obedient children,
not fashioning yourselves
according to the former lust and your ignorance,
but as He which hath called you as holy,
so be ye holy in all manner of conversation
because it is written, be ye holy for I am holy.
God cares how we live.
We represent the Lord.
We're His children.
And oh, how we ought to be honoring His name.
We find that it says that we might be partakers
of His holiness.
Continue with me back in Hebrews 12
and notice in verse number 11,
great truth is revealed to us here again
with regard to the subject matter of chastening.
It says, now, no chastening for the present
seemeth to be joyous.
How many of you can say amen?
I agree, right?
It's not enjoyable when you're dealing
with the chastisement,
but He's helping us by showing us what it proves
and what it produces.
He's helping us to understand
that we're not going to faint,
that we will despise not thou the chastening of the Lord,
that we will endure chastening
because we understand what it proves
and what it produces.
And yes, it's not joyous.
It's not an enjoyable time.
It's grievous as it says here in verse number 11.
Notice what it says though.
Nevertheless, afterward,
it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness
unto them which are exercised thereby.
Yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness.
It turns that unrighteous behavior
to righteous behavior.
That's the purpose anyway.
That's the intent, right?
That's why He's chastening us.
That's why He's disciplining us.
That's why He's correcting us.
That's why He's scourging us
so that that unrighteous behavior
can be corrected to become righteous behavior,
thus being in a condition that is pleasing to God.
And we find that it says
that it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness
unto them which are exercised thereby.
In other words, those that would respond properly,
those that would heed the correction of God,
the chastisement of God.
By the way, you understand that sometimes chastisement
can just come really simply
in the form of just a simple conviction.
I like it when it comes that way.
Amen.
By the way, I've said this before.
It's good when God steps on your toes
through the preaching of the Word of God,
through the reading of the Word of God.
When you're reading in your daily time with God
and you're getting alone with God
and you're reading the Word of God
and God, the Holy Spirit begins to prick your heart,
begins to step upon your toes,
that's a good thing.
I like that kind of chastisement.
But it can become more severe.
In fact, we find that there are times in which,
as I've mentioned earlier,
we ignore all of those warning signs.
We might be in a place where we quench
and grieve the Holy Spirit of God.
We've gotten so sideways
that we've just kind of ignored all of those warning signs.
And then all of a sudden it has to intensify.
Remember, God's chastisement,
it's measured and it's appropriate.
There are times in which I remember Brianna,
I'll pick on her just for a moment,
this morning when she was younger
and obviously still the case even today,
there were times with Brianna
that just her knowing that she disappointed me
just broke her.
She just didn't want to disappoint Daddy.
And I wonder this morning how often we come to that place
with our Heavenly Father saying,
I just don't want to disappoint God.
I don't want to displease Him.
The Bible tells us in 1 Corinthians
when we read about Paul in chapter number 10,
he's referencing several Old Testament events
and really in rapid succession.
And when he goes through those events,
he starts by saying this,
and with many of them, God was not well pleased.
See, I want God to be pleased with my life.
I want God to be pleased with my behavior.
We find that it yieldeth the peaceable fruit
of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby.
As we look at the passage of Scripture,
we continue looking at verses 12 through 17 this morning.
I want you to notice in our text of Scripture,
not only what chastening proves and what it produces,
but at number three in your notes this morning,
I want you to consider your response to chastisement.
I want you to consider how you respond to chastisement.
We've established this morning from verses four through 11,
the fact that chastisement proves that God loves us.
It proves that we belong to Him.
We've found that it produces in us that holiness,
we're partakers of His holiness,
that we can understand that it's for our profit
and that we can see that it yieldeth
the peaceable fruit of righteousness.
But the question that we ask ourselves this morning
as we consider these next few verses of Scripture
is how do we respond to chastisement?
When the Lord has to chasten you because you belong to Him,
because you're His child,
and there's something that's gotten sideways in your life,
and the Lord in His love and in His grace and mercy
brings chastisement in your life,
how do you respond to it?
We notice in our text of Scripture
in verses 12 and 13, number one,
we must continue in holiness.
I want you to think about this
in light of really the entirety of the subject matter
in chapter number 12.
Remember in verses one through three
it's talking about run the race.
And in verses 1 through 3, he tells us, especially in verse number 1, about the fact that we
need to lay aside every weight and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and we talked
last week about all those distractions, those things that would cause us to become detoured,
that would cause us to stop running the race that we're supposed to run, to get off track,
to not do that which God has called us to do.
We find that he told us that we consider we're looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher
of our faith, that we're to consider him, and all of those things, and how we're to
keep in the race, but I would say to you this morning that even in the same vein of that
thought of verses 1 through 3, as we enter into verses 4 through 17, and we deal with
the subject matter of chastisement, that there are some that when they experience chastening,
they can just kind of give up.
Just kind of get overwhelmed with it.
In fact, you've seen, and no doubt you've seen in some people's lives, humanly speaking,
where someone is disciplined, and they respond wrong to the discipline.
They respond incorrectly to the correction, so there's no doubt we've sought to correct
someone maybe in a task that they're doing, we say, no, no, you're not supposed to do
it that way, let me show you how to do it, and I'm not going to do it.
Well, that didn't help so much, did it?
That correction didn't go very far.
It wasn't that I wanted to do the job, I simply wanted to help somebody know how to do the
job.
And so when we think about the subject matter of chastisement and correction, we understand
that some might experience chastening, and they've forgotten that it proves that God
loves them, and it proves that they belong to God, and it produces some things, and they
begin to experience chastening, and they just give up.
They become weak.
The Bible tells us in verse number 12, wherefore, lift up the hands which hang down in the feeble
knees.
This is a child that's just been disciplined, and they're just moping, right?
What happened to you?
How much time do you have?
Let me tell you, you know what I mean?
But here he says this, and make straight paths for your feet, in verse number 13, lest that
which is lame, notice where it says, be turned out of the way, that literally means to just
stop, to just give up, to just not continue, and so we find that it says, but let it rather
be healed.
We think about the chastening of the Lord, and we understand that we must not be discouraged,
that we must continue in holiness, that we understand the fact that God has done this
for me in my life, because He loves me, and it proves that I belong to Him, and it's produced
some things in my life.
It's for my profit.
It's not so that I get overwhelmed, and say, well, then I'm just going to throw in the
towel, I give up, I can't do this, no, no, no, that I would continue in holiness, that
I would respond, understanding God's purpose and God's plan, and that I would continue
to live for Him, that I would continue, yes, I've corrected, remember, the end of verse
number 11, to them which are exercised thereby.
What does it do?
It yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness, and then I get back and I continue on.
Not only do we find that we're to continue in holiness, but number two, when we consider
our response to chastisement in verses 14 and 15, we must refuse to become bitter.
Refuse to become bitter.
Did you ever get upset with your parents when they disciplined you?
Was there ever a time when your parent disciplined you and they said something like this, this
hurts me more than it hurts you?
I was always perplexed by that statement.
I was like, you want to trade places then?
Like, I mean, this doesn't feel very good.
But the reality is that there are times, physically speaking, we think about that human relationship
that when we were disciplined, we got upset, we got angry, perhaps we got bitter at our
parents.
See, we need to be careful when we understand the chastening of the Lord that we don't become
bitter, that we understand that bitterness will trouble you, that bitterness is destructive.
It says here in verse number 14, follow peace with all men and holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord, looking diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God, lest
any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled.
Within the context of the portion of Scripture that we're looking at, we look at bitterness
within that context of chastening.
We understand we could speak about the subject matter of bitterness in a whole host of arenas
and the way in which people become bitter, but keeping in line with the context this
morning, we'd understand that response to the chastening and how we can become bitter.
How we can become angry.
There are times in which we do something like what Peter did, and I understand it's a completely
different context, but in John chapter number 21, as Jesus is giving Peter some instruction
and he's talking to Peter about follow me, which by the way, is the same instruction
that he gave Peter on the day that he called Peter, follow me and I will make you fishers
of men, and after Peter in John chapter 21 goes fishing and catches nothing, by the way,
we find that Jesus appears on the shore and he calls and they come and of course they
feast and then Jesus is having some conversation with Peter.
He asks him, do you love me?
And we find that then the Lord Jesus Christ gives Peter some instruction.
He says, follow me.
You know what Peter says?
Well, what about this guy?
What about John?
That's what he was talking about, John.
And what does Jesus say?
Don't worry about John.
See, there are times in our lives that perhaps you say, well, why am I getting the discipline?
Why isn't somebody else?
And we can become bitter instead of understanding that it's for our prophet.
I'm thankful that God loves me so much that he wants to deal with me, that he doesn't
want to let me go too far.
I hope that perhaps we would pray that way in our lives.
God help me not to get sideways.
Help me not to get off track.
Help me not to get away from you.
Help me to be sensitive to the Holy Spirit of God, the conviction through the preaching
of your word.
Listen, when I read the Bible, when I opened the scriptures early this morning to read
personally from God's word this morning, I'm reading through the book of Acts, how exciting
the book of Acts is.
And I finished the Bible a couple of times through this year and now I've just been reading
through the New Testament and I'm going to read through the New Testament a number of
times in this last couple of months of the year.
And as I'm reading through the book of Acts and I'm reading those first seven chapters
this morning, and I'm just overwhelmed with how God is moving and working and what he's
doing.
But before I even began reading, I said, God, would you convict me this morning?
God, would you comfort me this morning?
You know that God will use his word to comfort and convict us.
It's amazing.
I'm reading his word.
You know how I was convicted this morning?
I was convicted because there's a bunch of disciples that are serving God and they're
being faced with all sorts of just adversity, discipline, imprisoned and threatenings and
all of these things.
You know what they do?
They keep on keeping on.
Stephen, and I read the last part of chapter number seven this morning, he's stoned because
of his preaching.
The reality is that they were just continuing on.
I was convicted by that.
You know how I was comforted this morning?
They threw those rascals in prison and God let them out.
Amen.
God said, uh-uh, we're going to have you out.
And then he told them, go over to the temple over there and preach and teach.
And they did.
And then when they went to look for him, they said, truly, we found that the prison was
locked and shut, but they weren't in there.
I just started laughing.
I've read it before.
I know.
I try to write it fresh every day because I want God to work in my heart, in my life.
And I'm just rejoicing and I'm comforted.
And we find that then when they find out where they are, they say to them, did not we straightly
command you that you should no longer preach or teach in this man's name, yet you filled
Jerusalem with your doctrine.
Praise God.
That's what we're supposed to do.
Amen.
We have the same marching orders.
I was comforted.
But we find that when God convicts us, when God chastens us, we've got to be careful that
we do not respond in bitterness, that we refuse to become bitter, that we don't get angry
when God's chastening hand comes in our life, when he has to discipline us, that it doesn't
cause us to respond in an inappropriate way, but that we would continue in holiness, that
we would follow peace with all men, as it says in verse 14, and holiness, that we would
understand that there is the potential of becoming bitter when we face discipline, and
we say, I'm not going to respond that way.
Why?
Because I understand what it proves and I understand what it produces.
And that's why we've got to keep those two things in the forefront of our minds when
we think about the subject matter of discipline, of chastening.
I believe that's why verses 4 and 11 precede verses 12 through 17.
Why?
Because you're going to tell them, hey, this is what it's for.
This is what it proves.
This is what it produces.
Number three, under our response to chastisement, we consider how we would respond to chastisement.
In verses 16 and 17, I would say this, repent, repent.
Respond properly to it.
Repentance carries with it the idea of sorrow.
Repentance is both desired and appropriate.
Let me tell you what repentance is.
Repentance is a change of mind that results in a change of direction.
Repentance is that God disciplines me, He corrects me, He chastens me, and I say, okay,
I'm not going to keep doing that anymore.
I'm going to have a change of mind about this thing and it's going to impact my direction.
That change of mind will result in a change of direction.
As we look at the example in verses 16 and 17, we see the example.
from all the way back in the book of Genesis in chapter 27 with regard to
Esau. Now, you're familiar with Jacob and Esau, and you're familiar with some of the
things. In fact, he says in verse number 17, for you know, the writer of Hebrews
has the expectation that the people that he's writing to have a level of
knowledge of the Old Testament. Not that they would be ignorant of it, that they
would be aware of it. For you know. It's interesting that he says that you've
forgotten the exhortation in verse number five. So there's some things from
the Old Testament that he expected them to know, and he says, look, there's some
things that you forgot. By the way, if you forgot it, that mean you knew it at
one point. Amen? You don't forget something you've never been told. We
forget. Amen? We forget all the time. Some more than others. But we forget. We need
to be reminded of some things. And here he says in verse number 16, look at what
he says about Esau. Lest there be any fornicator or profane person as Esau, who
for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. For ye know how that
afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected. Now let me
pause there. We'll look at the last part of the verse in just a moment. You know
what happened in the life of Esau? He was very temporally focused, was he not? He
lived on the temporal plane. And we find that there was a day in which he needed
some meat, and he was willing to sacrifice whatever, and we find that that
took place. And yes, Jacob went through that process, and we see what's going on,
and we see that it's described for us in verse 16. But notice what it says in
verse 17, for you know how that afterward. See, when it came to the point when there
was going to be a blessing, all of a sudden Esau was in a place where he
wanted the blessing. He wasn't too interested in repentance. He wasn't too
interested in having a change in really his behavior. In fact, if you look in
Genesis chapter 27, you'll find a number of things about Esau. I'll turn over there
just quickly. We don't have much time left this morning, but I do want to
show you just a couple of things here. The Bible says, of course, with
regard to all that had took in place, and this situation that Isaac was going to
give that blessing, and then Esau comes in right after his brother Jacob had
departed and received the blessing. And we find that here's what Esau says in
verse number 41. It says this of Esau, and Esau hated Jacob because of the
blessing, wherewith his father blessed him. And Esau said in his heart,
the days of mourning for my father are at hand, then will I slay my brother Jacob.
We find also that when we think about the situation with Esau, that he
went and purposely married some folks that he knew that his parents wouldn't
be, married a gal that his parents wouldn't be in agreement with. And we
find that there's no repentance. In fact, he wanted the blessing. You ever want
that, you know, the child wants the ice cream? We say, man, you missed out on the
ice cream because of your behavior. And then they go and throw a fit. You're like,
yeah, case in point, right? I mean, look at this, right? But the reality is that
here it says, look what it says, back in Hebrews 12, verse 17. When he would
have inherited the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place of
repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. And I want you to
understand here that at the end of verse number 17, it's not saying that he sought
it, meaning repentance carefully with tears. No, what he sought with tears was
the blessing. Was the blessing. He wanted the blessing. He wasn't really too
concerned about the direction of his life, about the character, about the
behavior. He wanted the blessing. And we find that as God's people, as we would
think about the subject matter of chastisement, and we would consider
these last few verses of our text this morning, and we would consider our
response to chastisement, I asked this morning, how do you respond to the
chasing of the Lord? Can you remember the last time the Lord had to chase in you?
Can you remember how God in love, with measured and appropriate discipline, came
in your life? He used His Word to discipline you. He used the preaching of
His Word to chasten you. He used some other thing to chasten you. I don't know
what it was for you. But I wonder this morning, how do we respond to it? Do we
just, as it says in verse number 12, that word picture that is given, do we have
our hands which are hanging down in our feeble knees? Or do we continue? Say, no,
no, I'm not going to be discouraged because of this. I'm going to understand
that God in love has chastened me. And it's to produce something in my life. I'm
going to refuse to get bitter. I'm going to determine to repent that I'm going to
have a change of mind about this thing that's going to have a change in my
behavior. So this morning we think about the chastisement of the Lord. I would say
this, if you only get these two things this morning, I'll sum it up, I'll sum up
the whole thing real quickly. Two takeaways. Number one, appreciate
chastisement. Learn to appreciate it. Learn to thank God for it. Why? Because
it proves some things. It proves that He loves you. It proves that you belong to Him.
It produces some things in your life. He's not going to let you just keep on
going and going and going. No, no, He's going to bring chastisement in
your life because He loves you. He's going to bring about, it's going to yield
that peaceable fruit of righteousness. So number one, learn to appreciate
chastisement. Learn to thank God for it. You say, man, I've never thanked God for
conviction before. Start. Thank you God for convicting me. Thank you God for
chastening me. Number two takeaway this morning, determine that you'll respond
properly to chastisement. I'm going to determine to respond properly to it. Why?
Because I've understood what it proves and produces. See, if we had the knowledge
of chastisement this morning without the truth that God has given us with regard
to what it proves and what it produces, it'd really be hard to deal with. But when
I understand this morning what chastisement proves and what it produces,
it helps me to have a completely different approach to the subject
matter of chastisement. Paul says this, I'll close with this portion of
Scripture in 1 Corinthians 11. We often use the portion of Scripture with
dealing with the Lord's Supper. We've said that the Lord's Supper, it's a time
of remembrance, and certainly it is, this due in remembrance of me. It's a table of
expectation. He said this due until He comes, right? What a blessing. It's a table
of examination. Let a man examine himself. He says if we would
judge ourselves, we would not be judged. And he talks about this, about many have
eaten and drink that unworthily, and he says that for this cause many sleep.
He talks about being dead is what it speaks of. And the reality this morning is
that no doubt those individuals that are being spoken of by Paul in 1
Corinthians chapter 11, they just ignored all of the chastisement, and it
had to increase in severity until at one point they died. Because God said, I'm not
gonna let you go any further. And see for our lives this morning, I want to learn
the subject of chastisement so that I can respond properly to it, so that it
does not have to intensify in its severity. Amen? Our God loves us, and
because He loves us, He chasteneth us. Whom the Lord loveth, He chasteneth.
Let's pray. Father, we love you this morning. We thank you for loving us. Often
in our lives, there are things in which we reference, remember, and speak of that
would prove your love. Perhaps we've overlooked the subject matter that's
been before us this day of chastisement, but yet we find biblically that
chastisement proves that you love us. We're so thankful for your love. God, I
pray this morning that you would help us to learn to appreciate and thank you for
chastisement in our lives. I pray this morning that you would help us to
determine that we'd respond properly to chastisement in our lives. Help us, Lord,
to take these truths from your Word and properly apply them in our lives. If
there's one that's not sure of heaven, they've never been saved, I pray that
you'd give us an opportunity to take a Bible and show them how they can know
for sure that heaven is their home. But for your people this morning, God, would
you help us to be encouraged? Would you help us determine to
respond properly? We pray that in these few moments that you would have your
will and way, that decisions would be made and sealed that would bring honor
and glory to thy name. For it's in Christ's name we pray. Would you stand
with me? Heads are bowed, eyes are closed.